As generative AI has risen in popularity, we have seen many casual people experiment with it and flood the internet with works. In some cases, they have attempted to copyright work that is either written by or co authored by generative ai. One such case is the comic Zarya of the Dawn. In this case, the initial copyright was taken by the author who claimed it was all their original work. Post getting fully copyright they bragged on social media that they had copyrighted generative AI content. This led to a re-evaluation of the case.

In this revaluation, the copyright offie stated the work must be independently created by the author and must possess sufficient creativity. Due to previous precedent, copyright is restricted specifically to humans. The office stated that due to the fact that Midjourney doesn’t follow your prompt exactly, you have limited influence over it. Because you cannot completely control the output of the model, your ability to argue that the prompts count as creative work is severly hampered. Due to this, it is very hard to develop your desired output. According to the author it took a year to develop the images, and despite that they still needed to edit them to fix the imperfections.In the end the office of copyright did not determine that this was sufficient creative effort in either the prompts or fixing imperfections left by the AI. This leaves the work in a gray area of of copyright in which the text, plot, and layout are all considered creative for copyright, but the images of the comic aren’t. 

To further reinforce their stance, the copyright office initialized an investigation into generative AI that will produce three sections. At this time the third section on copyright in relation to training models has not been published, but the other two sections have. They established that as in the cases created by the invention of photography or computer aided designs, current copy right law is sufficent to determine the copyrightability of AI works. We see that in 2022 the copy right office confirmed that if a human isn’t involved it can’t be copyrighted under US law. Part of the issue with generated images according to the report is they aren’t reproduceable in these systems. Most don’t have seeds, and even if they do have seeds for randomness, they fail to output the exact same image consistently. There is an argument that, in the future, generative AI prompts could be considered creative works if they directly followed the prompt but currently, they take parts of the prompt and leave others. 

As for using it as an assistive work, it depends on the amount of work AI has performed in relation to the toal project. If the project is sufficiently large and the AI assistance is sufficiently small, the whole of the project can fall under copy right. We see this most commonly with films such as the Brutalist which used generative AI for sections of the film but still retains the  copy right. In general, these systems are black boxes of content creation for the end user. Becasue the user has so little influence on the output of the model, the output tends to fall under the same rules as the copyright of a derivative work which requires substantial changes for it to fall under new copy right. We also see very similar policies globally with most only becoming more extreme and clearer that generated content is not able to be copywritten, though there is legislation coming that may change this. The UK proposed a law that would bypass the copyright issues of training these models and allow them to ignore copyright law.
